In the late 30s with cable tool and eventually with rotary rigs and so on, a great deal of that population that filled up that town that went from 800 people to 4,000 people in a very short period of time were from Kilgore, Gladewater,
over in that part of the day.
Plus they were from Enid and Ponca City and that.
So I went to school with kids who grew up whose parents were Texans or Oklahomans.
So words like no count, fixin', carry me,
which were not the Dialogues of Illinois, were the Dialogues that I took with me to the University of Illinois, and a lot of folks thought I was from the Deep South, and why I wasn't, it's just that I grew up with kids, and this wore off.
So when I came down here,
The kids that were in my class really were much more like the kids I grew up with than the kids I went to school with in Champaign, because those kids were all upstate kids.
The bulk of them probably were from the Cook County area.
So I felt fairly comfortable and maybe that was part of the attraction was this community here was more like a rural community that my wife grew up in Monmouth, Illinois on the farm and the way I grew up.
So I didn't have any problem with that.
Now I think the traditions, the Aggie traditions, you know,
wearing the lipstick before the T-Sip game and putting the spikes, the bottle caps on your shoes before the SMU game and doing bonfire and Yale practice and all that.
I think those, but that gets anybody, I think, a change.
Early on, did any student attempt any kind of Aggie prank in your class?
No, I had no pranks.
There were no Aggie pranks in my class at all.
As you started grading?
That I knew of.
As you started grading papers the first few semesters, what was your impression of their quality, academic quality?
Oh, I felt comfortable with the quality.
They could write.
I gave all SA exams.
Compared to what you'd known at Illinois?
At Illinois, not much different.
No, I didn't find that.
Oh, you'd find some places where it'd be difficult for them to express themselves, but they have that today, and I have a feeling if I went to the University of Illinois they might have it there as well.
Now the, and the college business at that point was comparatively small.
Yeah, there were about forty.
Forty faculty, I think, probably.
Okay.
And do, were you all, was it obvious that people were dreaming that it was going to grow and progress?
I don't think it was obvious.
I think, I think there was an expectation.
But, you know, here I, keep in mind I,
As a young shavetail, I wasn't interested in what was going on up there.
I came ABD, I had to get my degree out of the way.
John Pearson was wanting us to look for summer money, and so I began to get involved that very year.
In the fall of 69, the following year, I started getting involved in the second half of the summer of 69, I started getting involved in the Sea Grant program.
And through Jim McNeil and I, we got some money, and I got some money to get funded in 69, and so I spent the next 10 years almost, or next, yeah, close to 69, from 69 to 75, spending most of my time, six, seven years, with my nose down in the Sea Grant program.
Describe that effort.
Well, John Calhoun had been kind of the,
the ramrod of this and helped get the Sea Grant program here.
Of course, he and John Pearson were close friends.
John came and said, you know, Sam, you guys need to see what you can do to get some research money out of this.
So I went out to
Some out here at the Bryan plant, Errol Air Force plant out here, and there was a guy by the name of Meineke, I think it was, Minke, out of food science or food technology, and he was grinding up old whiting off the Pacific coast and grinding it up and trying to reduce it down into food protein concentrate.
and the idea was we're going to take this fish protein and we're going to feed the world because here's all this underutilized species these trash fish that comes up in the trawls and gets thrown overboard and the other fish eat them why can't we save them take this protein and we can make a fish fire and
Well, uh, that, uh, uh, I started looking at that stuff and, uh, realized that, uh, first it's not soluble in water, which makes it kind of hard to make flour out of it, and I began to read a lot about it from the testimonies about fish protein concentrate that were going on in, in the Congress at that time, and so it was clear that we had to do something else, and so I,
I began to focus on the state of Texas a little bit more and I began to look at the marketing channels for seafood in the state of Texas.
I began to look at the consumers' attitudes towards seafood in the state of Texas and got some publications and got some visibility.
did some programs in Washington and I think that helped John like that and the next thing you know I began getting more raises and and in fact in 1972 I was recognized the outstanding research in the College of Business.
Now, you came here at what rank?
Assistant.
And I made associate, I think, in 74, I want to think, maybe 74, 75.
Maybe, yeah, 72 or 73, 73.
Were there, in those years, were there pretty regularly annual increases?
Yeah, the increases.
John was able and the university was able to begin, I think, to argue for more money.
Apparently, the university was wanting to grow, and so the legislature was every so often, every two years, was going to give money.
I can remember.
I got a raise, of course, in September, and then I got a raise in December.
So I got a mid-year raise of $100 a month or $150 a month, blew me away.
And then you turn around and you know in August you get another way.
So in essence, you got three raises in a year, unheard of.
And then the state of Texas, bless her heart, had so much money left over that they picked up our Social Security.
Now, that was great if a person could think a little bit that that's like an income, you know, that's a $1,600 or $1,700 raise.
But it didn't show up as a raise, see?
And so it was a pretty hard sell to people that you were attracting in that you didn't have to pay any Social Security because some of these people couldn't run a number.
But golly, what a heck of a deal.
As far as you understood in the department and the college, raises were merit based.
I take it they were merit-based, yeah.
You know, I never, I guess they were.
I never known that, I didn't ever know that I wasn't doing a good job, but I never had anybody come down and pat me on the back and say, man you're doing just what we want you to do.
Did anybody give you, either in writing or orally, any kind of annual appraisal?
No.
We had no reviews as we do now.
We had no reviews.
You just got it.
Were they being done you think?
I don't know.
I don't, I probably not because I became department head and I didn't have to do them.
What, you know, everything almost was student credit hour driven.
If your department generated a lot of student credit hours, you were probably going to get, because the merit money came to the dean and the dean handed it out not for individuals in the department.
He gave it out to the departments and looked at previous budgets.
And when I became department head in 75,
It took me one iteration of the budget to realize it didn't matter what I put down there.
It really didn't matter what I put down there.
It was whatever John Pearson wanted to give me.
And I could write eloquently.
And I thought, all right, but it wouldn't mean any money.
It wouldn't mean.
And so the next year, I just told my secretary, take last year's budget, put the same words in there, just add 8% or 10% to it and send it in.
And that's exactly what.
And I'd get back and I'd get my relative share of what everybody else got.
And I saw what everybody else got.
And so I knew what the game was.
It's not that way now.
But in those days, it was pretty just cut and dry.
how long did it take you to begin to feel sentimentally attached to the to this place whether it be the department the college or the institution sentimentally attached that grows because i presume when you arrived you were not you hadn't thought about whether or not you were going to be here forever no but i didn't even think about it uh i'm not a mover no but you know i i had no intentions of moving i
You know, at no time did I ever inquire about another school.
You know, they were taking very good care of us dollars and cents wise up through, I would say, 1980 maybe, as late as 1980.
During your first years, what did you see of the administration beyond the dean?
I didn't see much beyond the people who were provosts and social provosts.
There was a fellow, is it Suttles?
What was the guy's name?
Andy Suttles was the director.
He was the director for research.
Research.
And then there was a
No, those names aren't uh-uh.
Horace Byers.
Yeah, I knew of Horace Byers.
What about this president named Earl Rudder?
What did you think of him?
Oh, I loved Earl Rudder, but those things were often in the ionosphere, the stratosphere for me.
How often did you physically see him?
maybe at graduation, about the only time I really saw him.
He was over at the administration building, I think, and I don't know too much more about that.
You know, who was Dick Winery?
He's not in central administration until Calhoun.
Until Calhoun, that's right.
And that was my—John Calhoun was my closest
contact with outside college administrators.
All right now he becomes the vice president in 71.
After President Rudder dies.
Do you remember hear any reaction to Rudder's death?
No.
No, I don't know.
I don't hear it.
And then Williams becomes president.
Yeah, Jack Williams.
I never met him maybe over once or twice, and I don't know if he ever would recognize me personally, who I was.
But I really liked that guy.
That guy had a charisma to him that I felt.
I should agree with you.
That was the first year, I think, that we did a little promo for incoming students.
We did a little slide presentation, and the guys over in architecture put it together, and Randy Walagura
and John Grier and those guys put it together and they asked me to come over.
Rodney Hill was doing some stuff and so they took a picture of me and had me say a few words.
But I remember Jack Williams saying
And he kind of said, if you don't like young folks, you really ought not to be at Texas A&M.
And he said it in that deep Tennessee voice that he has and a slow voice.
And I can remember that.
That was a tough one.
Now, it was he who insisted that the board authorize him to take an existing dormitory and designate it for women in January of 1971.
And the enrollment then skyrocketed.
Did you all begin to see the effects of the enrollment in the department?
Oh, yeah.
Well, we saw more and more women.
And for somebody that came from a co-ed school,
I don't want, you know, that was fine with me and they just grew and we've always had some very good students.
And I've, you know, I have, there's a young lady out, Jane Richardson, her husband's very active over in the ag school and they live out at Ozona.
And I, she came in last fall and gave me a great big hug and her two kids were, she got three kids and one's going to be a freshman here and she remembers me and so, you know, you get this kind of feedback that you have.
Nancy Crouch, not Nancy Crouch, that wouldn't be right, but there were some of the other people here in town that I had as students.
Now I call them my grand students are now here.
Are there some things that, in hindsight, y'all did that either worked or didn't work in the late 60s, early 70s as a department?
That didn't work, things that we did?
Did or did not.
Any... You said y'all did some slides about... No, well, that's the university did those slides.
Yeah, yeah.
Did y'all do anything... To promote the college?
College or the department?
No, I think the college just kind of grew like topsy.
John may have had a plan, but...
I think A&M was still a pretty hard sell in places, particularly for the B school.
It may not have been for the sciences and other places, but it was a hard sell for the College of Business.
And in the College of Business was morale high?
Yeah, morale was high.
Why?
I think, one, we were getting paid well.
We were getting paid well.
And you should know probably is that I think the College of Business probably had as good a salary as some of those guys over in physics and chemistry just because supply-demand situation is very hard to attract the business school.
And as far as you and your colleagues were aware, how were salaries and other benefits here then compared to other schools?
I think we were above the mark.
We were above average at Texas A&M.
And that's why we were attracted.
Because I would go to national conferences and the word was, gosh, you guys are sure throwing a lot of money around.
And oftentimes that money still wouldn't get.
You still couldn't get the attention of somebody from big league schools.
Who were some key people that you all employed during that?
Oh, well, Pete Rose came to the college, and Pete helped us quite a bit.
And Don Frazier did a lot.
And Jim McNeil did.
Jim had, you know, his personality took a twist.
His daughter died.
And he had some trauma with that from a sudden death of a small dogger.
But Jim was well known around in marketing circles, a good researcher.
And, of course, Bob Strasser came, and Bob, a prolific writer.
Where did y'all get Bob?
Bob came out of Maryland.
I think he came to us from Maryland, but he had taught at Penn State and over in the East.
Bob never ran the department, but he and John hit it off real well.
Who recruited him, do you know?
I don't know who recruited him.
I don't know who got him here.
When you were part of a recruitment group, what did you all tell prospects about the department, the college, and the institution?
Well, I think we sold the Aggie spirit.
We sold that it was a great community to live in.
There was a lot of opportunity down here in terms of salary and growth.
We talked that the legislature had a lot in the future plans for the state of Texas, resided on the shoulders of Texas A&M.
We'd bring them down here, walk them around, show them the community.
And if you wanted a rural setting, and if you wanted a good place to raise your family, that we were equally inaccessible to all the major cities in Texas, but it was an academic environment.
We weren't a party school.
We were very serious.
We weren't like the schools over at San Marcos or at Austin.
or at Huntsville.
I think our kids here are as serious kids as you'll find, and we can work them hard.
Describe the air service in those years.
Oh, the air service, Davis Airlines.
Well, prior to that it was TTA, Treetop Airlines.
But describe Davis Airlines.
Well, Davis Airlines, Guy Davis,
ran a little two-prop, maybe had a couple planes.
And he'd fly between Dallas and College Station.
And I can remember a lot of my Sea Grant stuff, I'd be the only guy on the plane.
Since I was the only guy on the plane, why, a guy would let me sit up and run shotgun with him, and we would fly back to
College Station and visit.
And I was a pretty regular customer to him.
And I remember one time we were coming in and the voiceover says, why don't you make one sweep down there
And he says, well there's some deer on the runway and you need to just kind of get down there and shoo them off.
And you circle back and you come in.
And so sure enough we did.
And sometimes he couldn't fly.
So I would get the guy who was up here, Eddie
would drive for you, had a cab service.
La Rosa or Lopez.
It was an Italian family name.
Family Italian name.
And he's driven to Dallas to get me.
Particularly to Houston.
To Houston, drive you to Houston.
And he had an old Buick and he had 280,000 maybe 300,000, not a Buick, a Mercury.
He had a Mercury, and he kept that thing in tip-top shape.
In fact, he put an engine in my little Chevy II station wagon that I had at 63, so I could get another 100,000 miles out of that car.
Did you ever fly with Wolfgang, who was a guy who employed a pilot briefly who had been a former Luftwaffe pilot?
Well, that, no.
Wolfgang, no.
No, I never had him.
All right.
Did, do you remember any experiences with a prospective faculty member who were turned off by this being too small a town or too?
No, no, we, there were probably a lot of people.
We, we, in fact, we, I think we have more difficult time recruiting now than we did then.
We have more time, just because we're going after, we're going at the major schools, we're going to the Northwesterns, and we're going to Penn States and the Michigans and the Illinois, and so a lot of people, you know, just don't want to live in this rural environment.
Particularly spouses, you see, who are working spouses.
There just aren't the same job opportunities.
you're inferring that our sites are a little higher now.
Our sites are higher, plus in those days, wives came and they weren't, they were wives that were wives of the 50s and early 60s, and they weren't.
For example, describe your wife becoming a part of the community.
Well, my wife jumped in right away.
She's very gregarious, and so we became part of the Newcomers Club, or Welcome Wagon Club, or whatever it was.
She got involved with the Texas A&M women's social group, and next thing you know, within a couple years, she had finagled it.
We had a network of probably eight or ten people.
And over the years, that's winnowed down to three or four people that we regularly go with.
But she had ample opportunity to get around and meet people and found a little church to go to, UCC Church, United Church of Christ Church here.
And we wanted to stay with a small church and went with that and met some nice people over there.
What about the schools?
All the schools were great.
Absolutely great.
When we came here, Carter Creek was not completed north and south.
In fact, it stopped right at Tanglewood Park, so our kids would have to walk through the path to get up to Sul Ross.
And we were really pleased with the education our kids got.
They went from Saul Ross and then went up.
When we got here, I don't think the schools were integrated yet.
Kemp was still black, and it might have been within a year or two they integrated and they began to bust.
But all three of our kids, we had Abby here in 66, and all three of our kids went through the Bryan school systems, all got a great education.
And all succeeded very well here at Texas A&M.
And I'm really pleased with the quality of the teaching and the quality of the schools.
Now our kids were in, I guess, what they might call the honors or advanced programs, but we were really tickled with the quality of the work that we got here.
staying with the schools were you aware of any problems of any importance over integration in the Bryan School?
No and I tell you what happened to us we were fortunate I and I don't know how I did it why I did it was just one of those things you want to get kids involved in activities I got our kids involved with the Boys Club
And I guess it was starting with the football.
And the first team they had were the Jets.
And there was a guy by the name of Phil Graham, who was the coach of the Jets.
And so Phil is extremely competitive.
He and Chuck Maurice were the two coaches, young Shavetail assistant professors of economics here at Texas A&M.
So this one might have been
the fall 69 or 68 or 69 and and so our kids got involved and that was sponsored by the boys club later we got into the wrestling and i we would spend three nights a week wrestling practice and then well on the weekends we'd take off and take this old blue bomb bus all over uh texas from houston to dallas to east texas wrestling other boys clubs
Well, it's a lot of salt and pepper and a lot more pepper than salt in that arrangement.
And our kids got to know the other black kids their age because we had about 40 out for wrestling.
And we'd take a busload of 35 on that bus and our two boys and maybe two other boys would be the only white boys.
And so when it came to going to Bryan High School and going to Stephen F. Austin High School, our kids knew all the black kids.
And they were all friends with the athletes and the kids there.
And so we never saw that side of it because we were accepted on both sides, accepted by the white group and accepted by the black group.
And so we were fortunate.
Were you aware of any particular racial problems at Bryan High during those years?
No, not at that time.
Not at that time, we weren't.
Do you have any comparison you could make about racial relations in the Bryan public schools when your children were there compared to racial relations in the public schools in Illinois when you were a student?
Well, yeah.
When I was a student, of course, there weren't any blacks.
That's in the 50s, or if they were, they were nominal.
The year when I was deaning, and this was in the 60s and 63 and 64, there were
There was an effort on the part of the Big Ten schools to get more blacks into the Big Ten schools.
And it became quite competitive, and as you might suspect, the more prestigious schools and private schools had already taken the cream of the crop off the top of the black kids.
Those could write their ticket and go anywhere.
So what you were left were degrees of inferiority.
And we were latecomers.
University of Illinois was a late comer.
But there was this mandate, we've got to get some numbers up.
And I can recall that we admitted at the university into the College of Commerce students with ACT scores of 11.
out of Philadelphia.
Now the typical, maybe as high as 19, but the typical Illinois kid had an average ACT composite score of close to 30.
And that's a very good, probably it's closer to 32 maybe.
So here was a kid that was in the top 6 or 7 percent quartile or 10 percent quartile of the ACT scores and along comes a kid with an ACT 11.
And we at Illinois told the kids they were going to have dormitories and we told them what to and we didn't deliver.
We didn't give them the dormitory quality said we were going to and the next thing you know these kids were walking up and down parading up and down Wright Street.
and breaking in windows of the businesses there, and they had a problem.
Just because they didn't go at it methodically and systematically and over due time, rather they had to fill it rapidly.
Of course we didn't have that problem here.
Do you remember any of your first black students in classes here?
No, I didn't.
I don't remember.
I just remember our first black student on the football team, McElroy.
Leland McElroy, I think.
And it was Hugh.
Hugh McElroy.
He wasn't in one of your classes, was he?
No, no.
College of Business doesn't have a reputation of attracting very many athletes.
You mentioned earlier that when you first got here, sometimes the one or two girls would get hissed out.
As the enrollment begins to boom with women and we get more minority students, do you remember any incidents, anything?
No, I don't think.
I remember something you told me, was that if you looked at a graph of the number of married students at A&M,
before the COAD, and you looked at the ratio of number of married students afterwards, there was a declining curve because they were bringing their sex with them through the marriage vows, and now they didn't have to go to runoff all the way to Baylor and bird dog the girls at Baylor at Sam.
The girls were already here.
I think it was pretty well accepted.
I think you probably had more difficulty, and I'm not aware of all of it, but you're probably more so than I am of the difficulty of putting the women in the band and the women in the court.
Like, I never heard of any problems that a black student had here, really.
No, no.
Yes, there may have been one individual
white, one individual, black, in the hallway.
Something may have been said or not said.
But again, quite often that is in the eyes or the ears of the observer.
more than it is of the intent of the person.
You probably had just as many with the Orientals as you probably did with the back.
Or the tall, or the short, or the fat.
With Dr. Williams and John Calhoun and so forth, did you all begin, did you think that we were in a higher gear in the 70s?
Yeah.
Jack Williams, I think,
pushed the growth.
He must have done a very mesmerizing job over at Austin because those days were good days from a revenue point of view.
When did you all start a graduate program, do you know?
Well, we had a graduate program.